The Benefits of the Vajra Guru Mantra

And an Explanation of its Syllables

A Treasure Text Revealed by Tulku Karma Lingpa

I prostrate to the Guru, the Yidam and the Ḍākinī.

I, the lowly woman Yeshe Tsogyal, made a great outer, inner and secret maṇḍala offering and
humbly asked:

“O, Master Lotus Born, the work you have done for the welfare of all sentient beings here in
Tibet, in this and in future lives, is vast. No one of such extreme kindness has ever come
before, nor shall any come again. The practices you have given us are like essential nectar;
though I am a lowly woman, of this I have no doubt. However, sentient beings in the future
will have profuse thoughts and tremendous aggression; they will have wrong views towards
the Holy Dharma, and in particular they will blaspheme the supreme teachings of the Secret
Mantra. At that time, plague, famine and war will be widespread amongst sentient beings,
and in particular, China, Tibet and Mongolia will be destroyed like ants’ nests, and
a time of terrible suffering will befall the Tibetans.“You have spoken of many ways to remedy
these afflictions, but beings in the future will have no time to practice. Those who do
have a slight inclination towards practice will be beset by powerful obstacles. Beings will
not get along with one other; supplies and materials will be insufficient. Such terrible
times as these will be extremely difficult to avert. In such times, Guru, what are the
benefits of relying solely upon the practice of the Vajra Guru mantra? For the benefit of
people of weak intellect in the future, I humbly entreat you to tell us.”

The Master Lotus Born spoke thus:

“O, Lady of Faith, what you say is absolutely true. In such future times, that practice will
definitely be of short and long term benefit for sentient beings. Although I have concealed
many earth treasures, water treasures, rock treasures, sky treasures and so on which contain
unfathomable pith instructions and methods of practice, in the degenerate times it will
be terribly difficult for fortunate beings to find the conditions and circumstances to
meet with the teachings; this is a sign that beings’ merit is running out.“However, in such
times as those, this essential Vajra Guru mantra—if recited with vast bodhicitta aspiration
in great sacred places, in monasteries, on the peaks of high mountains and the shores
of vast rivers, in places inhabited by gods, demons and evil spirits, at the heads of valleys,
geophysical junctions and so on—by ngakpas with unbroken samaya, vow-holding monastics,
faithful men, women of fine qualities, and the like, however many times—one hundred, one
thousand, ten thousand, one hundred thousand, ten million, one hundred million, etc.—will
bring inconceivable benefits and powers. Countries everywhere will be protected from all
plague, famine, warfare, armed violence, poor harvests, bad omens and evil spells. Rain
will fall on time, harvests and livestock will be excellent, and lands will prosper. In this
life, future lives, and on the pathways of the bardo, fortunate practitioners will meet
me again and again—at best in actuality, or else in visions, and at the very least in dreams.
Having gradually perfected the levels and paths, there is no doubt that they will join
the ranks of male and female Awareness Holders in Ngayab Ling.“Even one hundred recitations
per day without interruption will make you attractive to others, and food, wealth and
enjoyments will appear effortlessly. If you recite the mantra one thousand, ten thousand,
or more times per day, you will bring others under your influence with your brilliance, and
blessings and powers will be continuously and unobstructedly obtained. If you perform one
hundred thousand, ten million or more recitations, the three worlds will come under your
power, the three levels of existence will fall under your glorious sway, gods and spirits
will be at your bidding, the four modes of enlightened activity will be accomplished without
hindrance, and you will be able to bring immeasurable benefit to all sentient beings in
whatever ways are needed. If you can do thirty million, seventy million or more recitations,
you will never be separate from the Buddhas of the three times nor ever apart from me;
thus, the eight classes of gods and spirits will obey your orders, praise your words, and
accomplish whatever tasks you entrust to them.“At best, practitioners will attain the rainbow
body; failing that, at the time of death, mother and child luminosities will meet; and
at the very least, they will see me in the bardo and all their perceptions having been
liberated into their essential nature, they will be reborn in Ngayab Ling and accomplish immeasurable
benefit for sentient beings.”

Thus he spoke.

“Great Master, thank you for telling us about such infinite benefits and powers. You have been
immensely kind. Although the explanation of the benefits and powers of the syllables of
Guru Padma’s mantra is unfathomable, for the sake of sentient beings in the future, I humbly
ask you to give us a brief description,” she asked.

Then the Great Master spoke thus:

“O, Noble Daughter, the Vajra Guru mantra is not only my essential mantra, it is the life-essence
of the deities of the four classes of tantra, the nine vehicles, the 84,000 aspects
of the Dharma, and so on. The heart essence of all the Buddhas of the three times, the lamas,
deities, ḍākinīs, Dharma protectors, and the like is encompassed by this mantra. The reason
for this is as follows. Listen well and hold this in your heart. Recite the mantra.
Write it. Tell it to sentient beings in the future.OṂ ĀḤ HŪṂ VAJRA GURU PADMA SIDDHI HŪṂOṂ
ĀḤ HŪṂ is the supreme essence of enlightened body, speech and mind.VAJRA is the supreme essence
of the Vajra Family.GURU is the supreme essence of the Ratna Family.PADMA is the supreme
essence of the Padma Family.SIDDHI is the supreme essence of the Karma Family.HŪṂ is
the supreme essence of the Buddha Family.OṂ ĀḤ HŪṂ VAJRA GURU PADMA SIDDHI HŪṂOṂ is the complete
Sambhogakāya of the Five Buddha Families.ĀḤ is the complete unchanging Dharmakāya.HŪṂ
is the complete Nirmāṇakāya—Guru Rinpoche.VAJRA is the complete assembly of Heruka deities.GURU
is the complete assembly of Lama Awareness Holder deities.PADMA is the complete
assembly of Ḍākinīs and powerful female deities.SIDDHI is the heart of all the wealth deities
and protectors of hidden treasures.HŪṂ is the heart of each and every Dharma protector.OṂ
ĀḤ HŪṂ VAJRA GURU PADMA SIDDHI HŪṂOṂ ĀḤ HŪṂ is the heart of the three classes of tantra.VAJRA
is the heart of the Vinaya and Sūtra.GURU is the heart of the Abhidharma and the Kriyā
Yoga.PADMA is the heart of the Upā and Yoga Tantras.SIDDHI is the heart of the Mahā and
Anu Yogas.HŪṂ is the heart of the Dzogchen Ati Yoga.OṂ ĀḤ HŪṂ VAJRA GURU PADMA SIDDHI HŪṂOṂ
ĀḤ HŪṂ purifies obscurations of the three mental poisons.VAJRA purifies obscurations
of hatred and aversion.GURU purifies obscurations of pride.PADMA purifies obscurations of
craving and attachment.SIDDHI purifies obscurations of jealousy.HŪṂ purifies obscurations
of delusion and disturbing emotions.OṂ ĀḤ HŪṂ VAJRA GURU PADMA SIDDHI HŪṂOṂ ĀḤ HŪṂ grants
the attainment of the three kāyas.VAJRA grants the attainment of mirror-like wisdom.GURU grants
the attainment of the wisdom of equanimity.PADMA grants the attainment of the wisdom
of discernment.SIDDHI grants the attainment of all-accomplishing wisdom.HŪṂ grants the attainment
of all that stems from primordial wisdom.OṂ ĀḤ HŪṂ VAJRA GURU PADMA SIDDHI HŪṂOṂ
ĀḤ HŪṂ subdues gods, spirits, and human beings.VAJRA conquers the gandharvas and fire spirits.GURU
conquers the lord of death and demonic spirits.PADMA conquers the harmful water gods
and spirits who reign over the mind.SIDDHI conquers the powerful demons who haunt mountain
ranges and passes.HŪṂ conquers the planetary demons and gods of localities.OṂ ĀḤ HŪṂ
VAJRA GURU PADMA SIDDHI HŪṂBy OṂ ĀḤ HŪṂ, the six transcendent perfections are accomplished.By
VAJRA, all peaceful activities are accomplished.By GURU, all enriching activities are
accomplished.By PADMA, all magnetizing activities are accomplished.By SIDDHI, all enlightened
activities are accomplished.By HŪṂ, all wrathful activities are accomplished.OṂ ĀḤ HŪṂ
VAJRA GURU PADMA SIDDHI HŪṂOṂ ĀḤ HŪṂ averts the dagger sorcery of Buddhists and Bönpos.VAJRA
averts the harmful powers of the wisdom deities.GURU averts the harmful powers of the
eight classes of gods and demons.PADMA averts the harmful powers of the worldly gods and spirits.SIDDHI
averts the harmful powers of nāgas and gods of localities.HŪṂ averts the harmful
powers of all three: gods, demons and human beings.OṂ ĀḤ HŪṂ VAJRA GURU PADMA SIDDHI
HŪṂOṂ ĀḤ HŪṂ crushes the forces of the five poisons.VAJRA crushes the forces of hatred and
aversion.GURU crushes the forces of pride.PADMA crushes the forces of craving and attachment.SIDDHI
crushes the forces of jealousy.HŪṂ crushes the forces of gods, demons and humans.OṂ
ĀḤ HŪṂ VAJRA GURU PADMA SIDDHI HŪṂBy OṂ ĀḤ HŪṂ, the accomplishments of enlightened body,
speech and mind are attained.By VAJRA, the accomplishments of the peaceful and wrathful
deities are attained.By GURU, the accomplishments of the Awareness-Holder Lamas are attained.By
PADMA, the accomplishments of the ḍākinīs and Dharma protectors are attained.By SIDDHI,
the supreme and common accomplishments are attained.By HŪṂ, whatever accomplishment
you wish for is attained.OṂ ĀḤ HŪṂ VAJRA GURU PADMA SIDDHI HŪṂOṂ ĀḤ HŪṂ transfers one to the
primordial pure realm.VAJRA transfers one to the Eastern Buddhafield of Manifest Joy.GURU
transfers one to the Southern Buddhafield of Glory.PADMA transfers one to the Western Buddhafield
of Bliss.SIDDHI transfers one to the Northern Buddhafield of All-Accomplishing
Action.HŪṂ transfers one to the Central Buddhafield of Immutability.OṂ ĀḤ HŪṂ VAJRA GURU PADMA
SIDDHI HŪṂBy OṂ ĀḤ HŪṂ, the level of the Three-Kāyas Awareness Holder is attained.By
VAJRA, the level of Level-Dwelling Awareness Holder is attained.By GURU, the level of Immortal-Life
Awareness Holder is attained.By PADMA, the level of the Great-Seal Awareness Holder
is attained.By SIDDHI, the level of the Spontaneous-Presence Awareness Holder is attained.By
HŪṂ, the level of Fully-Ripened Awareness Holder is attained.OṂ ĀḤ HŪṂ VAJRA GURU PADMA
SIDDHI HŪṂOne recitation of the Vajra Guru mantra will grant a physical body and entry
into this world. Any sentient being who sees, hears, or thinks of the mantra will definitely
be established among the ranks of the male and female Awareness Holders. The infallible
Vajra Guru mantra is the word of truth; if what you wish for does not happen as I have
promised, I, Padma, have deceived sentient beings—absurd! I have not deceived you—it will
happen just as I’ve promised.If you are unable to recite the mantra, use it to adorn the tops
of victory banners and prayer flags; there is no doubt that sentient beings touched by
the same wind will be liberated. Otherwise, carve it on hillsides, trees, and stones; after
they are consecrated, anyone who merely passes by and sees them will be purified of illness,
spirit possession, and obscurations. Spirits and demons dwelling in the area will offer
wealth and riches. Write it in gold on pieces of indigo paper and hang them up; demons,
obstacle-makers, and evil spirits will be unable to harm you. If you place the mantra upon
a corpse immediately upon death and do not remove it, during cremation rainbow colors will
flash out and the consciousness will definitely be transferred to the Blissful Realm of
Amitābha. The benefits of writing, reading and reciting the Vajra Guru mantra are immeasurable.
For the benefit of sentient beings in the future, write this down and conceal it.
May it meet with those of fortune and merit. Samaya Gya Gya GyaFrom those with wrong views,
this is sealed to secrecy. Gya Gya GyaIt is entrusted to those with pure samaya. Gya Gya
Gya

Tulku Karma Lingpa brought forth this treasure and copied it down from a golden scroll.

| Translated by Heidi Nevin in Darjeeling, India on August 9, 2002.